Clusters Concepts page (#1330)
pomerium/documentation: content/docs/concepts/clusters.mdx

---
id: zero-clusters
title: Clusters
description: This document describes Clusters in Pomerium Zero.
keywords: [clusters, pomerium zero]
sidebar_label: Clusters
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Clusters in Pomerium Zero

This document describes Clusters in Pomerium Zero.

TODO: include a video that walks through Clusters

## Clusters overview

A **Cluster** represents a single Pomerium deployment managed by Pomerium Zero, our hosted control plane. Pomerium Zero enables you to configure cluster settings for your personal account or organization.

Each cluster gets its own:

- **Cluster identity**
- **Cluster domain**
- **Cluster settings**
- **Routes and Policies**
- **Wildcard certificates**

### Cluster architecture

TODO: It would be ideal to get an architecture diagram here.

> ### Cluster identity

Reviewer: +1

#### Rotate cluster identity

A cluster identity token does not have a set expiration time. However, you may want to rotate the cluster identity in the Zero Console for security reasons. After you rotate the cluster identity, the previous token becomes obsolete.

<details>
  <summary>How to rotate cluster identity in the Zero Console</summary>
  <div>
    <ol>
      <li>From the navigation bar dropdown, select **Manage Clusters**</li>
      <li>Under **Actions**, select the **edit** icon</li>
      <li>Select the **Domains** tab</li>
      <li>In the **Cluster Identity** field, select **Rotate Identity**</li>
      <li>Copy the token and replace the old one in your configuration file</li>
    </ol>
  </div>
</details>

### Cluster domain

Pomerium Zero generates and assigns a unique **Cluster Domain** to your cluster. Your cluster domain contains your randomly generated **Cluster Name** and the `pomerium.app` subdomain.

It follows this format: `<CLUSTER-NAME-XXXX>.pomerium.app`

For example: `voracious-ape-1578.pomerium.app`

#### Change cluster Name

> If you don't like your randomly generated cluster name, you can change it manually in your cluster settings.

Reviewer 2: To me this almost reads like you can change the starter domain by changing the cluster name, which I don't think is the case.

I wonder if this would be a good place to instead link to a guide for adding a custom domain.

After rotating the cluster identity, you must pass it into your configuration and run Pomerium. See the steps below for your deployment environment.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="linux" label="Linux">

In the shell script below, replace `<cluster_token>` with your new cluster token before running the command:

```bash
curl https://console.pomerium.app/install.bash | env POMERIUM_ZERO_TOKEN=<cluster_token> bash -s install
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="docker" label="Docker">

1. In your `docker-compose.yaml` file, replace the value of the `POMERIUM_ZERO_TOKEN` environment variable with the new cluster token value:

   ```yaml title="docker-compose.yaml"
   services:
     pomerium:
       image: pomerium/pomerium:v0.25.1
       ports:
         - 80:80
         - 443:443
       restart: always
       environment:
       // highlight-start
         POMERIUM_ZERO_TOKEN: <CLUSTER_TOKEN>
       // highlight-end
         XDG_CACHE_HOME: /var/cache
         AUTOCERT_DIR: /var/cache/autocert
       volumes:
         - pomerium-cache:/var/cache

   volumes:
     pomerium-cache:
   ```

1. Run `docker compose up -d`

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="kubernetes" label="Kubernetes">

Author: Still need to confirm these steps are accurate for K8s.

     namespace: pomerium-zero
   type: Opaque
   stringData:
     pomerium_zero_token: <cluster_token>
   ```
1. Apply the manifest to your Kubernetes cluster
   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f ./secret.yaml
   ```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Cluster domain

Pomerium Zero generates and assigns a unique **Cluster Domain** to your cluster. A cluster domain contains a randomly generated subdomain and the `pomerium.app` domain.

It follows this format: `<CLUSTER-SUBDOMAIN-XXXX>.pomerium.app`

For example: `voracious-ape-1578.pomerium.app`

#### Cluster name

The **Cluster Name** is a customizable identifier for your cluster. It defaults to the randomly generated subdomain of your cluster domain, but you can change it at any time. Changing the cluster name does not affect your cluster domain.

If you want to change the cluster name, you can update it in your cluster settings:

1. From the navigation bar dropdown, select **Manage Clusters**
1. Under **Actions**, select the **edit** icon
1. In the **Cluster Name** field, enter your preferred cluster name
1. Save your changes and apply the changeset

![Viewing the new cluster name in the Zero Console](./img/clusters/cluster-name-table.png)

> #### Detected and Override IP address

Author: I personally think we should include this section here. At a minimum, we should cover these steps in Troubleshooting, or cross-link these pages.

---
id: clusters
title: Clusters
description: This document describes Clusters in Pomerium Zero.
keywords: [clusters, pomerium zero]
sidebar_label: Clusters
sidebar_position: 1
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Clusters in Pomerium Zero

This document describes Clusters in Pomerium Zero.

TODO: include a video that walks through Clusters

## Clusters overview

> A **Cluster** represents a single Pomerium deployment managed by Pomerium Zero, our hosted control plane. Pomerium Zero enables you to configure cluster settings for your personal account or organization.

Reviewer: You can think of a Pomerium cluster as a completely distinct deployment of Pomerium, and allows you to effectively shard you deployments for performance, governance, security, or management purposes. 

I think we should probably discuss common reasons people would want to use a cluster.

Each cluster gets its own:

- **Cluster identity**
- **Cluster domain**
- **Cluster settings**
- **Routes and Policies**
- **Wildcard certificates**

### Cluster architecture

> TODO: It would be ideal to get an architecture diagram here.

Reviewer: An entity diagram would make the relationship more obvious.

---
id: clusters
title: Clusters
description: This document describes Clusters in Pomerium Zero.
keywords: [clusters, pomerium zero]
sidebar_label: Clusters
sidebar_position: 1
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Clusters in Pomerium Zero

This document describes Clusters in Pomerium Zero.

## Overview

A **Cluster** represents a single Pomerium deployment managed by Pomerium Zero, our hosted control plane. You can think of a Pomerium cluster as a completely distinct deployment of Pomerium that allows you to effectively shard your deployments for performance, governance, security, or management purposes.

When you deploy a cluster, it gets its own:

- **Cluster identity**
- **Cluster domain**
- **Cluster settings**
- **Routes and Policies**
- **Wildcard certificates**

### Cluster use cases: Why clusters?

#### All-in-one mode deployment model

Pomerium consists of 4 services:

- Proxy service
- Authenticate service
- Authorize service
- Databroker service

> A cluster deploys these services in all-in-one mode, meaning the configuration for each service is managed from a single cluster instance. All inter-component communications are internally connected, with the exception of the Databroker service, which is an external dependency.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this falls into "use case" as we do not really support other ways of deploying zero. 

Maybe we can mention (in a different section) that pomerium zero clusters are deployed as "all in one" and reference to https://www.pomerium.com/docs/internals/configuration#all-in-one-vs-split-service-mode

#### Multiple cluster instances

> You can deploy multiple clusters from a single cluster identity (see [**Cluster identity**](#cluster-identity) below for more information). The ability to deploy multiple cluster instances means you can manage and run completely separate configurations for workloads that may otherwise be incompatible in a single cluster instance.

Reviewer 3: This is incorrect: you cannot deploy multiple clusters from a single cluster identity. 
you may, however, deploy multiple cluster _replicas_ from a single cluster identity. They, however, would share all the cluster configuration. 

> you can manage and run completely separate configurations for workloads that may otherwise be incompatible in a single cluster instance.

what is described is multiple clusters, not multiple cluster instances.

### Cluster identity

> When you create an account in Pomerium Zero, a new **Cluster Token** is generated and assigned to your personal account. This cluster token, which is provided to you during onboarding, is required to deploy your cluster instance.

Reviewer 3: While there is, indeed, an underlying cluster identity in zero, this is implementation detail and we do not directly expose it anywhere. 

Currently, in the UI we only talk about **Cluster Token**. 

<img width="463" alt="image" src="https://github.com/pomerium/documentation/assets/673131/7f5725f5-44f2-41b6-896e-2d6bdba633b4">

```suggestion
When you create a cluster in Pomerium Zero, a **Cluster Token** is generated that allows your Pomerium instance to connect to the Pomerium Zero.
```

You can generate a new cluster token at any time. See the [**Rotate cluster identity**](#rotate-cluster-identity) steps below for more information.

> #### Rotate cluster identity

Reviewer 3: While cluster identity in fact exists, this is implementation detail that is never exposed to the end user directly. I suggest we only mention **Cluster Token**, as this is the only thing end users see. 

```suggestion
#### Rotate cluster token
```

> A cluster token does not have a set expiration time. However, you may want to rotate the cluster identity in the Zero Console for security reasons. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A cluster token does not have a set expiration time. However, you may want to rotate the cluster token in the Zero Console for security reasons. For example:
```

> - A malicious insider could use the token to view the cluster's configuration, which may contain sensitive data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A cluster token secret was accidentally exposed, or
```

- You may lose track of the existing token, and want a new one

:::caution

Rotating the cluster identity will invalidate the existing cluster token.

:::

> To rotate your cluster identity in the Zero Console:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To rotate your cluster token in the Zero Console:
```

1. From the navigation bar dropdown, select **Manage Clusters**
1. Under **Actions**, select the **edit** icon
1. Select the **Domains** tab

> 1. In the **Cluster Identity** field, select **Rotate Identity**

Reviewer 3: the described UI does not exist. it is currently in the _Manage > Settings > Advanced_ and is called **Rotate Token*

<img width="1019" alt="image" src="https://github.com/pomerium/documentation/assets/673131/effba922-f26b-4243-ba1c-be3fd02bcf26">

1. Copy the token value and store it somewhere safe ![Rotating a cluster identity in the Zero Console](./img/clusters/pz-rotate-cluster-identity.gif)

> After rotating the cluster identity, you must pass it into your configuration and run Pomerium. See the steps below for your deployment environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After rotating the cluster token, you must pass it into your configuration and run Pomerium. See the steps below for your deployment environment.
```

#### Detected and Override IP Address

Whenever you start a cluster, it must fetch its configuration from the Pomerium Zero control plane. During this process, Pomerium attempts to detect the cluster's outbound IP address to connect to it.

In the Zero Console, the cluster's IP address is referred to as the **Detected IP Address**. Depending on your environment, the detected IP address may not be reachable by you, the end-user. This could be the case if, for example, you're running a cluster:

- Locally from your laptop behind a NAT-enabled router
- Inside a corporate intranet
- Behind a firewall
- In a Kubernetes server where the ingress load balancer IP address doesn't match the egress IP address

In such cases, you may see a `DNS_PROBE_FINISHED_NXDOMAIN` error in your browser when you access a route. As a workaround, we've provided the **Override IP Address** field, which allows you to manually set the IP address so that Pomerium Zero can connect to your cluster.

![Manually setting the cluster IP address in the Zero Console](./img/clusters/cluster-ip-address-settings.png)

### Cluster settings

> Each cluster is assigned its own **Cluster settings** object, meaning the available settings within a cluster apply only to that cluster instance. This means changes applied to one cluster instance won't affect another cluster deployed with the same token.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each cluster is assigned its own **Cluster settings** object, meaning the available settings within a cluster apply only to that cluster instance. This means changes applied to one cluster instance won't affect another cluster deployed with the same token.
```

this is incorrect. all clusters deployed with the same token share all the configuration (settings, routes, certs, etc).

### Routes and Policies

> **Routes** and **Policies** defined in a cluster are scoped only to that cluster, and are not available in other cluster instances.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Routes** and **Policies** defined in a cluster are scoped only to that cluster, and are not available in other clusters.
```

Configuration changes applied in the remote console are communicated over a streaming connection to your local cluster. Each cluster is connected to its own storage backend, which synchronizes state across replicas.

    ![A diagram depicting how clusters communicate with the Zero Console](./img/clusters/clusters-architecture.png)

Each replica within a cluster runs Pomerium Core in an all-in-one mode, meaning the services that comprise Core are deployed together and share session state. Similarly, replicas communicate with each other to synchronize state across a cluster.

This interconnectivity between replicas enables you to horizontally scale your cluster to adapt to the purposes of your use case, be it performance, governance, security, or management related.

This model affords the following benefits:

- Simplifies configuration
- Retains data privacy
- Optimizes scalability

## Cluster benefits

### Simplified configuration

Cluster configuration is managed entirely in the Zero Console. As you apply configuration changes in the Zero Console, your cluster fetches and applies these changes locally.

This model ensures that:

> - Your cluster always stays in sync with the Zero Console as changes are applied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your cluster remains synchronized with the Zero Console as changes are applied
```

- You don't have to manage cluster configuration files or environment variables
- The Zero Console persists your cluster's last-known configuration

### Data privacy

> Pomerium doesn't monitor your organization's traffic or collect private user data. Pomerium _does_ store deployment and configuration details that are necessary to control access to your services, such as your routes, policies, and TLS certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pomerium cannot and does not monitor your organization's traffic or collect private user data. Pomerium does, however,  needs to store configuration details required to maintain the hosted control plane. Pomerium only stores deployment and configuration details needed to control access to your services, such as routes, policies, and TLS certificates and encrypts sensitive entities when appropriate.
```

### Scalability

Replicas within a cluster synchronize records over a streaming connection, which keeps the cluster abreast of configuration changes. In this way, you can deploy multiple replicas to meet the needs of your infrastructure and organization.

See [**Persistence and scalability**](#persistence-and-scalability) below for more information.

## Deploy your cluster

### Cluster token

When you deploy a cluster in Pomerium Zero, a **Cluster Token** is generated for you during onboarding. The cluster token environment variable instructs Pomerium to run in a special "Zero-managed" mode. In Zero-managed mode, your cluster connects to the Pomerium Zero cloud, where you can manage your cluster from the Zero Console.

You can generate a new cluster token at any time. See the [**Rotate cluster token**](#rotate-cluster-token) steps below for more information.

#### Rotate cluster token

A cluster token does not have a set expiration time. However, you may want to rotate the cluster token in the Zero Console for security reasons. For example:

- A cluster token was accidentally exposed
- You may lose track of the existing token, and want a new one

:::caution

> Rotating the cluster token will invalidate the existing cluster token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rotating the cluster token will invalidate the current token.
```

## Why clusters?

A cluster model reduces the complexity of managing Pomerium: All of a cluster's configuration, including settings, routes, policies, and certificates, are managed from a central control plane hosted in the Pomerium Zero cloud. This allows you to manage multiple isolated Pomerium Core deployments, each with its own configuration.

Configuration changes applied in the hosted control plane are communicated over a streaming connection to your local cluster. Each cluster is connected to its own storage backend, which synchronizes state across replicas.

    ![A diagram depicting how clusters communicate with the Zero Console](./img/clusters/clusters-architecture.png)

Each replica runs Pomerium Core in an all-in-one mode, meaning the services that comprise Core are deployed together and share session state. Similarly, replicas communicate with each other to synchronize state across a cluster.

> The interconnectivity between replicas enables you to horizontally scale your cluster to adapt to the purposes of your use case, be it performance, governance, security, or management related.

Author: I updated the text. Thanks for the in-depth review/s, @wasaga.
